Add TLSRoute type listener (Gateway API support) (#12747)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/security/proc-accessing-kafka-using-tlsroutes.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-deploy-client-access.adoc

[id='proc-accessing-kafka-using-tlsroutes-{context}']

> = Accessing Kafka using Gateway API TLSRoutes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Accessing Kafka using Gateway API `TLSRoute` resources
```

[role="_abstract"]

> Use Gateway API `TLSRoute` resources to access a Kafka cluster from clients outside the Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Kubernetes Gateway API `TLSRoute` resources to access a Kafka cluster from clients outside a Kubernetes cluster.
```

> To use TLSRoutes, add configuration for a `tlsroute` type listener in the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use `TLSRoute` resources, add configuration for a `tlsroute` type listener in the `Kafka` custom resource.
```

When applied, the configuration creates a dedicated `ClusterIP` service and `TLSRoute` resource for an external bootstrap and each broker in the cluster.
Clients connect to the bootstrap hostname, which routes them through the bootstrap service to connect to a broker.

> Per-broker connections are then established using DNS names, which route traffic from the client to the broker through the broker-specific TLSRoutes and services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Per-broker connections are then established using DNS names that route traffic from the client to the broker through the broker-specific Gateway API TLS routes and services.
```

> Strimzi manages the `TLSRoute` resources, but it does not manage the Gateway API `Gateway` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strimzi manages the `TLSRoute` resources, but does not manage the Gateway API `Gateway` resource.
```

You must provide a Gateway API implementation and a `Gateway` that accepts the `TLSRoute` resources created by Strimzi.

NOTE: Strimzi uses and supports the `gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1` API version of the `TLSRoute` resource.

> To connect to a broker, you specify a hostname for the TLSRoute bootstrap address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect to a broker, specify a hostname for the `TLSRoute` bootstrap address.
```

> For access using TLSRoutes, the port used in the Kafka client is typically 443.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For access using `TLSRoute` resources, the port used in the Kafka client is typically 443.
```

> The procedure shows basic `tlsroute` listener configuration using TLS passthrough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The procedure shows a basic `tlsroute` listener configuration using TLS passthrough.
```

Use the `parentRefs` configuration property to attach the generated TLSRoutes to a Gateway API resource, such as a `Gateway`.

> Use the `bootstrap.host` configuration property to specify the hostname used by the bootstrap TLSRoute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `bootstrap.host` configuration property to specify the hostname used by the bootstrap `TLSRoute`.
```

> Use the `hostTemplate` or the `brokers[].host` fields to specify the hostname for each broker TLSRoute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `hostTemplate` or the `brokers[].host` fields to specify the hostname for each broker `TLSRoute`.
```

For more information on listener configuration, see the link:{BookURLConfiguring}#type-GenericKafkaListener-reference[`GenericKafkaListener` schema reference^].

> .TLS passthrough and termination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: style compliance change.
Adjusted in next comment

`TLSRoute` resources use Server Name Indication (SNI) to route TLS traffic.

> The TLS mode is configured in the Gateway API `Gateway` listener, not in the Strimzi `TLSRoute` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TLS mode is configured in the Gateway API `Gateway` listener, not in the Strimzi `TLSRoute` resource.

You can configure TLS passthrough or TLS termination.
```

> With TLS passthrough, the Gateway forwards the TLS connection to the Kafka brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With TLS passthrough, the Gateway forwards the encrypted TLS connection to the Kafka brokers.
```

The Kafka listener must have TLS encryption enabled (`tls: true`).
The connection uses the TLS certificates from the Kafka brokers, and you can use TLS client authentication.
To configure listeners to use your own listener certificates, xref:proc-installing-certs-per-listener-{context}[use the `brokerCertChainAndKey` property].

With TLS termination, the Gateway terminates the TLS connection and forwards unencrypted traffic to the Kafka brokers.
Configure the Kafka listener without TLS encryption (`tls: false`).

> The client uses the Gateway certificate, and TLS client authentication in the Strimzi listener is not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client uses the Gateway certificate, and TLS client authentication between the client and Kafka brokers is not available.
```

.Prerequisites

* A Gateway API implementation that supports `gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1` `TLSRoute` resources is installed
* A Gateway API `Gateway` is configured for Kafka traffic and accepts TLSRoutes from the Kafka namespace
* DNS records for the bootstrap and per-broker hostnames resolve to the Gateway address
* A running Cluster Operator

In this procedure, the Kafka cluster name is `my-cluster`.
The name of the listener is `external`.

.Procedure

. Configure a `Kafka` resource with an external listener set to the `tlsroute` type.
+

> Specify a bootstrap hostname, per-broker hostnames, and the Gateway API parent references for the generated TLSRoutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specify a bootstrap hostname, per-broker hostnames, and the Gateway API parent references for the generated `TLSRoute` resources.
```

  labels:
    app: my-cluster
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: myproject
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
    listeners:
      - name: external
        port: 9094
        type: tlsroute
        tls: true # <1>
        authentication:
          type: tls
        configuration:
          parentRefs:
            - name: kafka-gateway # <2>
              kind: Gateway # <3>
              group: gateway.networking.k8s.io # <4>
              namespace: myproject # <5>
              sectionName: kafka # <6>
          bootstrap:
            host: bootstrap.example.com # <7>
          hostTemplate: broker-{nodeId}.example.com # <8>
    # ...
----
<1> Enables TLS encryption in the Kafka brokers for TLS passthrough. For TLS termination at the Gateway, set this property to `false` and do not use `tls` authentication.
<2> Name of the Gateway API parent resource that the generated TLSRoutes attach to.
<3> Kind of the Gateway API parent resource.
<4> API group of the Gateway API parent resource.
<5> Namespace of the Gateway API parent resource.
<6> (Optional) Gateway listener name to attach the TLSRoutes to.
<7> Hostname used by the bootstrap TLSRoute. The hostname must resolve to the Gateway address.

> <8> Template used to generate the hostnames for the per-broker TLSRoutes. The hostnames must resolve to the Gateway address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml,subs=attributes+]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  labels:
    app: my-cluster
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: myproject
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
    listeners:
      - name: external
        port: 9094
        type: tlsroute
        tls: true
        authentication:
          type: tls
        configuration:
          parentRefs:
            - name: kafka-gateway
              kind: Gateway
              group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
              namespace: myproject
              sectionName: kafka
          bootstrap:
            host: bootstrap.example.com
          hostTemplate: broker-{nodeId}.example.com
    # ...
----

* `tls: true` enables TLS encryption in the Kafka brokers for TLS passthrough. 
For TLS termination at the Gateway, set this property to `false` and do not configure `tls` authentication for the listener.
* `name` under `parentRefs` specifies the name of the Gateway API parent resource that the generated `TLSRoute` resources attach to.
* `kind` under `parentRefs` specifies the kind of the Gateway API parent resource.
* `group` under `parentRefs` specifies the API group of the Gateway API parent resource.
* `namespace` under `parentRefs` specifies the namespace of the Gateway API parent resource.
* `sectionName` under `parentRefs` optionally specifies the Gateway listener name that the generated `TLSRoute` resources attach to.
* `bootstrap.host` specifies the hostname used by the bootstrap `TLSRoute`.
The hostname must resolve to the Gateway address.
* `hostTemplate` specifies the template used to generate hostnames for the per-broker `TLSRoute` resources.
The hostnames must resolve to the Gateway address.
```

Reviewer: We're moving away from callouts to bullets in the docs

. Create or update the resource.
+
[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
kubectl apply -f _<kafka_configuration_file>_
----
+
If TLS encryption is enabled, a cluster CA certificate to verify the identity of the Kafka brokers is created in the secret `my-cluster-cluster-ca-cert`.
+
`ClusterIP` type services are created for each Kafka broker, as well as an external bootstrap service.
+

> A `TLSRoute` is also created for each service, with a hostname to expose it using the Gateway API implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `TLSRoute` resource is also created for each service, with a hostname to expose it using the Gateway API implementation.
```

+

> .TLSRoutes created for the bootstrap and brokers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLSRoutes created for the bootstrap and brokers:
+
```

[source,shell]
----
NAME                                  HOSTNAMES                 AGE
my-cluster-kafka-external-0          broker-0.example.com      1m
my-cluster-kafka-external-1          broker-1.example.com      1m
my-cluster-kafka-external-2          broker-2.example.com      1m
my-cluster-kafka-external-bootstrap  bootstrap.example.com     1m
----
+

> Strimzi waits for each TLSRoute status to contain at least one parent reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strimzi waits for each `TLSRoute` status to contain at least one parent reference.
```

> If a TLSRoute status is not updated with a parent reference before the Cluster Operator reconciliation timeout, the reconciliation fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `TLSRoute` status is not updated with a parent reference before the Cluster Operator reconciliation timeout, the reconciliation fails.
```

. Retrieve the address of the bootstrap service from the status of the `Kafka` resource.
+
[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.listeners[?(@.name=="external")].bootstrapServers}{"\n"}'

bootstrap.example.com:443
----

. If you are using TLS passthrough, use a target broker to check the client-server TLS connection on port 443 using the OpenSSL `s_client`.
+
[source,shell]
----
openssl s_client -connect broker-0.example.com:443 -servername broker-0.example.com -showcerts
----
+

> The server name is the Server Name Indication (SNI) for passing the connection to the broker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server name is used as the Server Name Indication (SNI) for passing the connection to the broker.
```

+
If the connection is successful, the certificates for the broker are returned.
+
.Certificates for the broker
[source,shell,subs=attributes+]
----
Certificate chain
 0 s:O = io.strimzi, CN = my-cluster-kafka
   i:O = io.strimzi, CN = cluster-ca v0

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the connection is successful, the certificates for the broker are returned:
+
[source,shell,subs=attributes+]
----
Certificate chain
 0 s:O = io.strimzi, CN = my-cluster-kafka
   i:O = io.strimzi, CN = cluster-ca v0
----
```

. If you are using TLS passthrough, extract the cluster CA certificate.
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get secret my-cluster-cluster-ca-cert -o jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' | base64 -d > ca.crt
----

. Configure your client to connect to the brokers.

.. Specify the address for the bootstrap service and port 443 in your Kafka client as the bootstrap address to connect to the Kafka cluster.
+
If your Gateway uses a different external port, use that port in the client bootstrap address and configure per-broker `advertisedPort` entries or the `advertisedPortTemplate` property for the per-broker advertised ports.

.. If you are using TLS passthrough, add the extracted certificate to the truststore of your Kafka client to configure a TLS connection.
+

> If you enabled a client authentication mechanism, you will also need to configure it in your client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you enabled a client authentication mechanism, you must also configure it in your client.
```

+

> For TLS termination at the Gateway, configure the client to trust the Gateway certificate instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For TLS termination at the Gateway, configure the client to trust the Gateway certificate instead of the cluster CA certificate.
```

> NOTE: If you are using your own listener certificates with TLS passthrough, check whether you need to add the CA certificate to the client's truststore configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you are using your own listener certificates with TLS passthrough, check whether you need to add the CA certificate to the client truststore configuration.
```
